Getting an MOT

Printable version

1. When to get an MOT

The MOT test checks that your vehicle meets road safety and environmental standards.

You must get an MOT for your vehicle by either:

- the third anniversary of its registration

- the anniversary of its last MOT, if it’s over 3 years old

Some vehicles need to be tested at one year old - check the MOT fees table to see which.

Check your MOT history to see when your vehicle’s MOT expires.

There are different rules and processes in Northern Ireland for MOTs for vehicles registered in Northern Ireland.

If the MOT has run out

- If your tax is due to run out, register your vehicle as ‘off the road’ - you cannot renew your vehicle tax if your MOT has expired.

- Book an MOT test.

- Tax your vehicle once it has passed its MOT.

You cannot drive or park your vehicle on the road if the MOT has run out. You can be prosecuted if caught.

The only exceptions are to drive it:

- to or from somewhere to be repaired

- to a pre-arranged MOT test

Earliest date you can get an MOT

An MOT lasts for a year.

To find out when it runs out you can either:

- check your MOT history online

- check the date that’s printed on your current MOT certificate, if you have one

You can sign up to get reminders that your MOT is due.

You can be fined up to £1,000 for driving a vehicle without a valid MOT.

You can get an MOT up to a month (minus a day) before it runs out and keep the same renewal date.

This does not apply if your last MOT was in Northern Ireland and your vehicle’s next test is in Great Britain. Your renewal date will be based on the date of the GB MOT test.

Example

If your MOT runs out on 15 May, the earliest you can get an MOT to keep the same renewal date for next year is 16 April.

You can get an MOT earlier, but the renewal date for the following year will change to one year (minus a day) from the date the vehicle last passed its MOT.

Example

Your MOT is due to run out on 15 May, so the earliest you can get it done is 16 April. However, you take your vehicle for its MOT on 14 April and it passes. This means that the MOT expiry date changes to 13 April the following year.

2. Booking an MOT

You must use an approved MOT test centre to get your MOT.

Only centres showing the blue sign with 3 white triangles can carry out your MOT.

How you can book

Contact an MOT centre to book an MOT.

There are maximum fees that the MOT centre can charge.

There’s a different process to book an MOT in Northern Ireland.

If you cannot take your vehicle in person

Some MOT centres will collect your vehicle for the MOT and then return it. Contact an MOT centre to see if this service is available.

You can also get someone else to take your vehicle into a test centre if they are insured to drive it.

3. MOT costs

There’s a maximum amount MOT test stations can charge. This depends on the type of vehicle.

The maximum fee for a car is £54.85 and £29.65 for a standard motorcycle.

You do not pay VAT on the fee.

Vehicle class

Age first MOT needed (years)

Maximum MOT fee

Motorcycle (engine size up to 200cc)

1

3

£29.65

Motorcycle with sidecar (engine size up to 200cc)

1

3

£37.80

Motorcycle (engine size over 200cc)

2

3

£29.65

Motorcycle with sidecar (engine size over 200cc)

2

3

£37.80

3-wheeled vehicles (up to 450kg unladen weight)

3

3

£37.80

3-wheeled vehicles (over 450kg unladen weight)

4

3

£54.85

Cars (up to 8 passenger seats)

4

3

£54.85

Motor caravans

4

3

£54.85

Quads (max unladen weight 400kg - for goods vehicles 550kg and max net power of 15kw)

4

3

£54.85

Dual purpose vehicles

4

3

£54.85

Private hire and public service vehicles (up to 8 seats)

4

3

£54.85

Ambulances and taxis

4

1

£54.85

Private passenger vehicles and ambulances (9 to 12 passenger seats)

4

1

£57.30

Goods vehicles (up to 3,000kg design gross weight)

4

3

£54.85

Class 4 vehicles (9 to 12 passenger seats) with a seat belt installation check

4a

n/a

£64

Private passenger vehicles and ambulances (13 to 16 passenger seats)

5

1

£59.55

Private passenger vehicles and ambulances (more than 16 passenger seats)

5

1

£80.65

Playbuses

5

1

£80.65

Class 5 vehicles (13 to 16 passenger seats) with a seatbelt installation check

5a

n/a

£80.50

Class 5 vehicles (more than 16 passenger seats) with a seatbelt installation check

5a

n/a

£124.50

Petrol, diesel and hybrid goods vehicles (over 3,000kg up to 3,500kg design gross weight)

7

3

£58.60

Zero emission goods vehicles (between 3,501kg and 4,250kg design gross weight)

7

3

£58.60

4. How the MOT test works

During the MOT, important parts on your vehicle will be checked to make sure they meet the legal standards.

You can watch the test from a viewing area but you’re not allowed to interrupt the tester.

Parts that are tested

You can read more about:

- what’s tested for cars

- what’s tested for motorcycles

The test does not cover the condition of the engine, clutch or gearbox.

The MOT guide and inspection manuals tell you everything that’s tested.

5. MOT test result

Your vehicle can either pass or fail the MOT.

Passing the MOT

If your vehicle passes, your result will be recorded in the MOT database.

You can:

- check your MOT history to see the result online

- ask the test centre to give you a printed MOT certificate

You might also get a list of ‘minor’ or ‘advisory’ problems to monitor or fix in the future.

Failing the MOT

Your vehicle will fail if the test result lists ‘dangerous’ or ‘major’ problems with your vehicle. You might not be allowed to drive until you fix the problems.

You might also get a list of ‘minor’ or ‘advisory’ problems to monitor or fix in the future.

If your vehicle fails, your result will be recorded in the MOT database.

You can:

- get a ‘refusal of an MOT test certificate’ from the test centre

- check your MOT history to see the result online

You can appeal the result if you think it’s wrong.

Driving a vehicle that’s failed

You can take your vehicle away if:

- your current MOT is still valid

- no ‘dangerous’ problems were listed in the MOT

Otherwise, you’ll need to get it repaired before you can drive.

If you can take your vehicle away, it must still meet the minimum standards of roadworthiness at all times.

You can be fined up to £2,500, be banned from driving and get 3 penalty points for driving a vehicle that has failed its MOT because of a ‘dangerous’ problem.

6. Retest after a repair

In some cases your vehicle can have a partial retest for free or a reduced MOT fee.

Leaving your vehicle for repair

You only need a partial retest if you leave the vehicle at the test centre for repair and it’s retested within 10 working days. There’s no fee for this.

Taking your vehicle away for repairs

You can take your vehicle away if your MOT is still valid.

Check your MOT history to find out when it runs out.

If your MOT has run out you can take your vehicle to:

- have the failed defects fixed

- a pre-arranged MOT test appointment

In both cases, your vehicle still needs to meet the minimum standards of roadworthiness at all times or you can be fined.

Taking it back for a retest the next working day

You will not have to pay again if you take it back to the same test centre before the end of the next working day for a partial retest on one or more of these items:

- access panels

- battery

- bonnet

- bootlid

- brake pedal anti-slip

- break glass hammer (class 5 vehicles only)

- doors (including hinges, catches and pillars)

- door open warning device (class 5 vehicles only)

- dropsides

- electrical wiring

- emergency exits and signs (class 5 vehicles only)

- entrance door remote control (class 5 vehicles only)

- entrance/exit steps (class 5 vehicles only)

- fuel filler cap

- headlamp cleaning or levelling devices (that does not need a headlamp aim check)

- horn

- lamps (excluding headlamp aim)

- loading door

- main beam ‘tell-tale’

- mirrors

- rear reflectors

- registration plates

- seatbelts (but not anchorages), seatbelt load limiter and seatbelt pre-tensioner

- seats

- sharp edges or projections

- stairs (class 5 vehicles only)

- steering wheel

- tailboard

- tailgate

- trailer electrical sockets

- towbars (excluding body around anchorage points)

- tyre pressure monitoring system

- vehicle identification number (VIN)

- windscreen glass, wipers and washers

- wheels and tyres (excluding motorcycles and motorcycles with sidecar)

Taking it back for a retest within 10 working days

You’ll only need a partial retest if you take the vehicle from the test centre for repairs and take it back within 10 working days. You can be charged a partial retest fee for this.

In all other cases, you’ll need to get a full retest and pay the full MOT test fee again.

7. Test result appeals and problems

You can appeal the results of an MOT with the Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency (DVSA) if either:

- your vehicle failed the MOT

- your vehicle passed the MOT, but you think it should have failed

You should not have any repairs made until the appeal process has finished.

You can take your own action against an MOT test centre through Trading Standards, personal legal proceedings or reporting the centre to the police. DVSA cannot help you take action against a centre.

Appeal if your vehicle failed an MOT

You need to discuss your test results with the test centre before anyone starts repairs.

You can appeal against the failure if you think it’s wrong. Fill in the complaint form and send it to DVSA within 14 working days of the test.

DVSA will contact you within 5 days to discuss your appeal.

If DVSA decides to recheck your vehicle, you’ll need to arrange a date and pay the full test fee again. They’ll send you an inspection report listing any vehicle defects.

If your appeal is successful, you’ll be refunded the test fee.

Appeal if your vehicle passed, but you think it should have failed

You’ll need to appeal to DVSA if you do not think your car should have passed its MOT. Fill in the complaint form and send it to DVSA within the time limits below.

DVSA will contact you within 5 days to discuss your appeal.

If DVSA decides to recheck your vehicle, you’ll need to arrange a date. You will not need to pay the test fee again. They’ll send you an inspection report listing any vehicle defects.

Time limits

If your vehicle passed, you need to appeal within:

- within 3 months of the MOT if it’s a corrosion-related problem

- within 28 days has passed for other defects

If you think your MOT certificate is not genuine

You can check that your MOT certificate is genuine by checking its MOT status.

If you’re unhappy with your MOT service

Contact DVSA if you’re not happy with your MOT service.

DVSA Telephone: 0300 123 9000 Monday to Friday, 8am to 5pm Find out about call charges

8. Vehicles that do not need an MOT

You do not need to get an MOT for a vehicle until it reaches the age shown in the MOT fees table.

Exempt vehicles

Other vehicles that do not need an MOT include:

- goods vehicles powered by electricity and registered before 1 March 2015

- tractors

- some historic (‘classic’) vehicles

A list of exempt types of vehicles is on the MOT exemption form (V112). You need to fill in the form if your vehicle is listed so that you can either tax it or apply for tax exemption.

Lorries, buses and trailers

You must get an annual test for lorries, buses and trailers instead of an MOT. It’s sometimes called the ‘annual vehicle test’.

9. Fix mistakes on your MOT record

You can get information corrected on your MOT (such as the mileage or vehicle details) if it’s wrong.

Get the wrong mileage corrected

The way you get the mileage corrected depends on when your MOT was.

If your MOT was within the last 28 days

Ask the MOT centre that did the MOT to update the mileage.

They’ll need to see the vehicle again to check the mileage. They’ll update the record in the MOT database to what the mileage is at the time of checking the vehicle.

If your MOT was more than 28 days ago

Report the mistake online to get it corrected.

You’ll need all of the following:

- your driving licence number

- the MOT test number

- the date of the MOT

- the vehicle’s number plate

- the vehicle identification number (VIN) - also known as the vehicle’s chassis number

- the make, model and colour of your vehicle

You must have evidence that the mileage is wrong to get the mistake fixed.

It needs to show:

- what the mileage should be

- a date within one day of the MOT test

Your evidence needs to be one or more of the following:

- an invoice for the MOT

- an emissions printout

- a service receipt

- a vehicle job card from the MOT centre

If your scan or photo includes personal information, for example your payment details, you should blank it out or remove it.

Once DVSA has updated the mileage, you can check your vehicle’s MOT history and download or print a corrected MOT certificate.

Get vehicle details or the MOT centre corrected

Report the mistake online if your MOT has the wrong:

- vehicle make or model

- vehicle colour

- country where the vehicle was registered

- MOT test centre

You’ll need all of the following:

- your driving licence number

- the MOT test number

- the date of the MOT

- the vehicle’s number plate

- the vehicle identification number (VIN) - also known as the vehicle’s chassis number

- the make and model of your vehicle

Add or remove test records

If there’s an MOT test missing from your vehicle’s MOT history, or a test that does not belong there, email or call DVSA to have it corrected.

You’ll need to give your:

- name

- telephone number

- vehicle number plate

- vehicle make and model

- date of the MOT

- MOT test number (if you know it)

- MOT test centre name and address

DVSA customer service centre enquiries@dvsa.gov.uk Telephone: 0300 123 9000 Monday to Friday, 8am to 5pm Find out about call charges
