Make, register or end a lasting power of attorney

Printable version

1. Overview

A lasting power of attorney (LPA) is a legal document that lets you (the ‘donor’) appoint one or more people (known as ‘attorneys’) to help you make decisions or to make decisions on your behalf.

This gives you more control over what happens to you if you have an accident or an illness and cannot make your own decisions (you ‘lack mental capacity’).

This guide is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg).

There are 2 types of LPA:

- health and welfare

- property and financial affairs

You can choose to make one type or both.

Your LPA will be legally binding only in England and Wales. There’s a different way to make a power of attorney if you need one that:

- works in Scotland

- works in Northern Ireland

If you’ve already made an LPA, you can manage or use your LPA.

Eligibility

You must be 18 or over and have mental capacity (the ability to make your own decisions) when you make your LPA.

You do not need to live in the UK or be a British citizen to make an LPA.

How to make a lasting power of attorney

- Choose your attorney (you can have more than one).

- Fill in the forms to appoint them as an attorney.

- Register your LPA with the Office of the Public Guardian (this will take 8 to 10 weeks if there are no mistakes in the application).

Applying to register an LPA costs £92 unless you get a reduction or exemption.

You can cancel your LPA if you no longer need it or want to make a new one.

Health and welfare lasting power of attorney

Use this LPA to give an attorney the power to make decisions about things like:

- your daily routine, for example washing, dressing, eating

- medical care

- moving into a care home

- life-sustaining treatment

It can only be used when you’re unable to make your own decisions.

Property and financial affairs lasting power of attorney

Use this LPA to give an attorney the power to make decisions about money and property for you, for example:

- managing a bank or building society account

- paying bills

- collecting benefits or a pension

- selling your home

It can be used as soon as it’s registered, with your permission.

Help deciding if you should make a lasting power of attorney

Contact the Office of the Public Guardian if you need help.

Office of the Public Guardian customerservices@publicguardian.gov.uk Telephone: 0300 456 0300 Relay UK (if you cannot hear or speak on the phone): 18001 then 0300 123 1300 Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 9am to 5pm Wednesday, 10am to 5pm Find out about call charges

2. Choose your attorney

You can choose one or more people to be your attorney. If you appoint more than one, you must decide whether they’ll make decisions separately or together.

Who can be your attorney

Your attorney needs to be 18 or over. They could be:

- a relative

- a friend

- a professional, for example a solicitor

- your husband, wife or partner

You must appoint someone who has the mental capacity to make their own decisions.

Your attorney does not need to live in the UK or be a British citizen.

When choosing an attorney, think about:

- how well they look after their own affairs, for example their finances

- how well you know them

- if you trust them to make decisions in your best interests

- how happy they will be to make decisions for you

Read about an attorney’s responsibilities to help you with your decision.

You cannot choose someone who is subject to a Debt Relief Order or someone who is bankrupt if you’re making a lasting power of attorney (LPA) for property and financial affairs.

If there’s more than one attorney

If you’re appointing more than one person, you must decide if they’ll make decisions:

- separately or together - sometimes called ‘jointly and severally’ - which means attorneys can make decisions on their own or with other attorneys

- together - sometimes called ‘jointly’ - which means all the attorneys have to agree on the decision

You can also choose to let them make some decisions ‘jointly’, and others ‘jointly and severally’.

Attorneys who are appointed jointly must all agree or they cannot make the decision.

Replacement attorneys

When you make your LPA you can nominate other people to replace your attorney or attorneys if at some point they cannot act on your behalf anymore.

3. Make a lasting power of attorney

You can make a lasting power of attorney (LPA) online or using paper forms.

Either way, you need to get other people to sign the forms, including the attorneys and witnesses.

You can get someone else to use the online service or fill in the paper forms for you, for example a family member, friend or solicitor.

You must register your LPA or your attorney will not be able to make decisions for you.

It takes 8 to 10 weeks to make an LPA if there are no mistakes in the application. It’s usually quicker if you make it and pay online.

This guidance is about LPAs that will be used in England or Wales. Read about power of attorney in Scotland and power of attorney in Northern Ireland.

You do not need to live in the UK or be a British citizen. Your LPA will be legally binding only in England and Wales. For example, if you’re making a property and affairs LPA, it can only be used for your properties and assets in England and Wales.

Make an LPA online

Create or sign in to an existing account to:

- make an LPA

- continue making an LPA that you’ve already started

You can then:

- get help and guidance at each step

- save your forms and complete them later

- review your answers and fix any mistakes

You need to print out the forms and sign them when you’ve finished.

If you’ve made and registered an LPA already, there’s a different service for using an LPA.

Start now

Use the paper forms

Download the forms and print them out.

Signing the forms

You need to sign the forms before you send them off. They also need to be signed by:

- the attorneys

- witnesses

- a ‘certificate provider’, who confirms you’re making the LPA by choice and you understand what you’re doing

Everyone must sign the same original document. They cannot sign copies or use digital signatures.

Who can be a witness or certificate provider

Witnesses and certificate providers must be 18 or over.

Attorneys can witness each other sign, but they cannot:

- witness you sign

- sign as the certificate provider

You cannot be a witness if you’re the person appointing an attorney.

Get help

Ask the Office of the Public Guardian about help you can get if you:

- do not have a computer or printer

- want to use the online service but need some help

Office of the Public Guardian customerservices@publicguardian.gov.uk Telephone: 0300 456 0300 Relay UK (if you cannot hear or speak on the phone): 18001 then 0300 123 1300 Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 9am to 5pm Wednesday, 10am to 5pm Find out about call charges

4. Register a lasting power of attorney

When you’ve made your lasting power of attorney (LPA), you need to register it with the Office of the Public Guardian (OPG).

It takes 8 to 10 weeks to register an LPA if there are no mistakes in the application.

You can apply to register your LPA yourself if you’re able to make your own decisions.

Your attorney can also register it for you. You’ll be told if they do and you can object to the registration.

Notify people

Before you register, send a form to notify people (LP3) to all the ‘people to notify’ (also called ‘people to be told’) you listed in the LPA.

They’ll have 3 weeks to raise any concerns with OPG.

If you’re using the online service to make an LPA, it will create and fill in the LP3 forms for you.

How to register

Apply to register as soon as you’ve sent forms to notify people.

To register, you need to sign your completed LPA form and send it to OPG.

If you create your LPA form using the online service, you will need to print it out to do this.

Office of the Public GuardianPO Box 16185BirminghamB2 2WH

The address is also on the form. Make sure you include the original LPA form and the fee.

You can send a certified copy if you do not have the original form. Write a covering letter to explain why you do not have the original.

If you made your LPA with an older paper form

You can register by filling in form LP2 if you made your LPA:

- on forms LPA114 or LPA117 before 1 January 2016

- on forms LP PA or LP PW before 1 April 2011

Otherwise you’ll need to make a new LPA.

How much it costs

Applying to register an LPA costs £92.

If you want both a personal welfare LPA and a property and affairs LPA, it will cost £184 in total.

You can pay by:

- credit or debit card

- cheque

Make your cheque payable to ‘Office of the Public Guardian’ and write your name on the back. Send it to OPG with your forms.

Get a reduction or exemption

You can apply for a reduction if you earn less than £12,000. You might also be able to apply for an exemption if you’re on certain benefits, such as Income Support.

Download and fill in the application form. The form has more information about eligibility.

If you make a mistake on your form

Depending on the type of mistake, OPG may let you correct it and apply again within 3 months for £46.

5. Certify a copy of a lasting power of attorney

You can confirm that a copy of your registered lasting power of attorney (LPA) is genuine by ‘certifying’ it if you’re still able to make your own decisions.

Your attorney can use the certified copy to prove they have permission to make decisions on your behalf, for example to manage your bank account.

You can also make certified copies of your LPA before it has been registered. You or your attorney can use this to register your LPA if you do not have the original form.

How to certify a copy

On the bottom of each page of the copy of the LPA (sections 1 to 11 and any continuation page), write:

“I certify this is a true and complete copy of the corresponding page of the original lasting power of attorney.”

If your LPA is not yet registered, do not write on the bottom of sections 12 to 15 (the registration application form). Your LPA will not be certified if you write on these sections.

On the bottom of the final page of the copy (section 11 or any continuation page), you must also write:

“I certify this is a true and complete copy of the lasting power of attorney.”

You need to sign and date every page.

Other ways to certify a copy

Copies of your LPA can also be certified by:

- a solicitor

- a person authorised to carry out notarial activities

6. Changes you need to report

You (if you still have mental capacity) or one of your attorneys must tell the Office of the Public Guardian (OPG) if:

- you or an attorney change name or address

- an attorney dies

If you or an attorney change name or address

You must tell OPG if you or your attorney changes name and send a copy of the marriage certificate or deed poll that shows the new name. Do not send any original documents.

You must tell OPG if you or your attorney changes address, but you do not need to send any supporting documents.

Do not make changes to your lasting power of attorney (LPA) document itself, as it might become invalid.

If one of your attorneys dies

You must tell OPG and send them the original LPA and all certified copies.

If the attorney died outside of the United Kingdom, you must also send a copy of the death certificate.

What happens to the existing LPA

OPG will cancel the LPA if the donor dies, or if an attorney dies and either:

- the attorneys had to make all decisions together - this is called acting ‘jointly’

- there was only one attorney

A cancelled LPA will be destroyed. If you want OPG to send it back instead, include a note asking for its return along with a return address.

If an attorney dies and the attorneys were able to make any decisions on their own (called acting ‘jointly and severally’), OPG will update the LPA instead. You must include a return address when you send the LPA.

Contact OPG

Office of the Public Guardian customerservices@publicguardian.gov.uk Telephone: 0300 456 0300 Relay UK (if you cannot hear or speak on the phone): 18001 then 0300 123 1300 Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 9am to 5pm Wednesday, 10am to 5pm Find out about call charges

Office of the Public GuardianPO Box 16185BirminghamB2 2WH

If you email or write to OPG you should include:

- your full name, address and date of birth

- whether you are the attorney or the donor

- the donor’s full name address and date of birth (if you are the attorney)

- the reference number on your LPA

7. Removing an attorney

You can ask the Office of the Public Guardian (OPG) to remove an attorney if your lasting power of attorney (LPA) is registered and you still have mental capacity to make decisions.

You will need to send OPG a written statement called a ‘partial deed of revocation’.

If you want to add another attorney you need to end your LPA and make a new one.

Use the following wording. Replace the words in the square brackets with the relevant details.

Partial deed of revocation

“This partial deed of revocation is made by [donor’s name] of [donor’s address].

1: I granted a lasting power of attorney for property and financial affairs/health and welfare [delete as appropriate] on [date donor signed the lasting power of attorney] appointing [name of first attorney] of [address of first attorney] and [name of second attorney] of [address of second attorney] to act as my attorney(s).

2: I hereby revoke [attorney’s name that you are revoking] ONLY from the lasting power of attorney and the authority granted to him/her.

Signed and delivered as a deed [donor’s signature] Date signed [date] Witnessed by [signature of witness] Full name of witness [name of witness] Address of witness [address of witness]”

Where to send a partial deed of revocation

Send the partial deed of revocation to the Office of the Public Guardian (OPG) with the original LPA document. You must also tell your attorney or attorneys that you’re ending your LPA.

Office of the Public GuardianPO Box 16185BirminghamB2 2WH

8. End your lasting power of attorney

You can end your lasting power of attorney (LPA) yourself - if you have mental capacity to make that decision.

You need to send the Office of the Public Guardian (OPG) both:

- the original LPA

- a written statement called a ‘deed of revocation’

Use the following wording for the deed of revocation. Replace the words in the square brackets with the relevant details.

Deed of revocation

“This deed of revocation is made by [your name] of [your address].

1: I granted a lasting power of attorney for property and financial affairs/health and welfare (delete as appropriate) on [date you signed the lasting power of attorney] appointing [name of first attorney] of [address of first attorney] and [name of second attorney] of [address of second attorney] to act as my attorney(s).

2: I revoke the lasting power of attorney and the authority granted by it.

Signed and delivered as a deed [your signature] Date signed [date] Witnessed by [signature of witness] Full name of witness [name of witness] Address of witness [address of witness]”

You must be able to make your own decisions when you end your LPA.

You can also complain if you have concerns about your attorney, for example if they’re not carrying out their responsibilities properly.

Other ways a lasting power of attorney can end

Your LPA may end if your attorney:

- loses the ability to make decisions - ‘loses mental capacity’

- divorces you or ends your civil partnership if they’re your husband, wife or partner

- becomes bankrupt or they’re subject to a Debt Relief Order (DRO) - if they’re a property and financial affairs attorney

- is removed by the Court of Protection

- dies

If your only attorney dies

Your LPA will end if your attorney dies and you have no replacement attorneys.

You must tell OPG and send them:

- the original LPA

- all certified copies of the LPA

If your attorney died outside the UK you must also include their death certificate.

Your LPA will be destroyed unless you ask OPG to send it back to you. You’ll need to include your address.

Office of the Public Guardian customerservices@publicguardian.gov.uk Telephone: 0300 456 0300 Relay UK (if you cannot hear or speak on the phone): 18001 then 0300 123 1300 Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 9am to 5pm Wednesday, 10am to 5pm Find out about call charges

Office of the Public GuardianPO Box 16185BirminghamB2 2WH

Your LPA can continue if:

- there are other attorneys who can act ‘jointly and severally’ - but not if they are only allowed to act ‘jointly’

- there are replacement attorneys

If you die

Your LPA will end automatically when you die. Your affairs will be looked after by your executors or personal representatives from that point, not your attorney.
